Applied Linguistics, 2024, 45, 786–805
https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amae001
Advance access publication 25 January
Article
© The Author(s) (2024). Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please 
contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained 
through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.
What Should Go With This Word Here: 
Connecting Lexical Collocations and 
Rhetorical Moves in Narrative Stories
Yishi Jiang1, Xiaofei Lu2,
, Fengkai Liu3, Jianxin Zhang4, and Tan Jin5,*,
1School of Foreign Languages, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2Department of Applied Linguistics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA
3Department of Linguistics and Translation, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4School of International Studies, University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China
5School of Foreign Studies, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China
*E-mail: tjin@scnu.edu.cn
An emerging body of corpus-based genre analysis studies has examined the connection 
between different types of formulaic language and rhetorical moves in various genres of aca­
demic writing. The current study extends this body of research into the understudied genre of 
narrative stories and the understudied phraseological unit of lexical collocations. Specifically, 
we compiled a corpus of narrative stories written by expert writers, extracted a list of frequent 
collocations from the corpus, developed a rhetorical move framework for narrative stories, 
examined the distribution of rhetorical stages and moves in the corpus, and explored the con­
nection between collocations and rhetorical moves in the corpus. The findings of our research 
culminated in an online interface for searching the corpus for collocations and exploring their 
use in sentences realizing different rhetorical stages and moves in context. We discuss the 
potential pedagogical value of our findings and the resulting online interface for promoting 
learner awareness of the connection between linguistic features and rhetorical functions in 
narrative stories in genre-based pedagogy.
Introduction
An increasing body of research has employed corpus-based text analysis and genre-based move 
analysis to unveil the linguistic and rhetorical features of academic (e.g. Cortes 2013; Mizumoto 
et al. 2017) and argumentative genres (e.g. Bychkovska and Lee 2017). Such research has gen­
erated useful findings regarding the formulaic and functional patterns of discourse, bridging 
the form-function gap in genre analysis research and yielding pedagogical resources that can 
help novice writers participate in unfamiliar genres (Tardy 2016). However, little research in this 
area has attended to narrative stories, an important genre frequently used to help young second 
language (L2) learners become proficient in interpreting information in the target language and 
using it to represent their worlds to others (Lawler 2002; Berman and Nir-Sagiv 2007). Familiarity 
with the linguistic patterns and plot sequences of narratives is essential for learners to pro­
duce grammatically well-formed and logically well-developed narratives (Deane et al. 2019). A 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
systematic analysis of the types of formulaic language used to communicate different rhetorical 
functions in narrative stories can contribute findings to inform genre-based pedagogy aimed 
at helping learners develop this competence. In light of these considerations, the current study 
undertakes to identify frequently occurring lexical collocations in a corpus of expert-composed 
narrative stories, construct a rhetorical move framework for narrative stories, match the identi­
fied collocations to rhetorical moves in the corpus, and discuss the implications of our findings 
for genre-based writing research and pedagogy.
Lexical collocations
Lexical collocations, that is, frequently co-occurring pairs of words that are grammatically con­
nected (Nation 2013), are one type of multi-word expressions that have received much attention 
in formulaic language research. Knowledge of lexical collocations is essential for L2 learners 
(Webb and Kagimoto 2011), as evidenced in Nation’s (2013) claim that ‘language knowledge is 
collocational knowledge’ (517). Indeed, as important building blocks of spoken and written dis­
course, lexical collocations can represent the distinct characteristics of different genres, making 
it important for learners to be aware of the usage of different lexical collocations in different gen­
res of text (Conrad and Biber 2004). In terms of language processing and production, experiencing 
patterns of word co-occurrence in context and storing such patterns in their long-term memory 
can help learners improve the fluency and thoroughness of their language processing as well 
as the fluency and formulaicity of their language production (Underwood et al. 2004; Ellis 2012).
Lexical collocations are morphologically flexible phraseological items. Different from word 
combinations presented in a fixed order (e.g. lexical bundles), lexical collocations are built 
around a pivot word and a collocate that may occur in different orders and morphological forms, 
possibly with a certain number of intervening words between them. A pivot word is usually a 
­high-frequency word that is used to search for other words that frequently co-occur with it, 
namely, its collocates (e.g. Rogers et al. 2021). For instance, a search for the lemmatized pivot 
word advice and its collocate give in a text may yield giving advice, advice that she gives, gave me 
some advice, etc., all of which are considered instances of the same lexical collocation. This high 
flexibility in form makes lexical collocations a highly productive and yet potentially challenging 
resource for language learners.
In identifying lexical collocations, researchers have usually considered pivot words and col­
locates that are both content words that enter into a particular grammatical relationship, and 
that co-occur frequently across multiple texts (e.g. Wray and Perkins 2000; Ackermann and 
Chen 2013). These criteria help ensure the semantic meaningfulness, grammatical integrity, 
and a high enough frequency of use of the lexical collocations identified. With these criteria, 
researchers have extracted different lists of lexical collocations from different types of text cor­
pora. For instance, Shin and Nation (2008) identified the top 1,000 most frequent collocations in 
spoken English and argued that most of them could be taught in an elementary English course. 
Durrant (2009) extracted a list of 1,000 positionally variable academic collocations from a corpus 
of research articles (RAs) and reported that students in different disciplines may have different 
needs when it comes to learning those collocations. Ackermann and Chen (2013) extracted 2,468 
frequent lexical collocations from a corpus of academic English that were judged by a panel of 
experts to be pedagogically relevant.
Rhetorical moves in narrative stories
The concept of genre is based on the idea that members of a discourse community can recognize 
the similarities among texts frequently used in their community and draw on their experiences 
to comprehend and produce such texts relatively easily (Hyland 2008). Specifically, a genre is a 
class of communicative events with a common set of communicative purposes (Swales 1990), and 
genre analysis aims at revealing the rhetorical structures of texts in a particular genre, commonly 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
788  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
involving what is known as rhetorical move analysis (Swales 1981). A rhetorical move is ‘a section 
of text that performs a specific communicative function’ (Kanoksilapatham 2007: 23). For exam­
ple, Swales (1990) identified three rhetorical moves in RA introductions, namely, establishing a 
territory, establishing a niche, and occupying a niche, along with a set of steps characterizing the 
organization of each move. Having learners perform genre analysis of texts in a particular genre 
has the potential of raising learners’ awareness of the textual and rhetorical features of that 
genre (Negretti and McGrath 2018).
Narratives are a literary genre that aims at accounting ‘connected events or people’s actions 
in a specific time frame’ (Yoon 2021: 113), in which events or affairs are generally chronologi­
cally ordered and causally related (Sanford and Emmott 2012). Narratives are considered as an 
‘essential genre that provides important information about the narrator’s linguistic competence 
and pragmatic sensitivity in the target language’ (Kang 2005: 260) and that is crucial to literate 
life and literate achievement (Deane et al. 2019). Through the process of learning and crafting 
narrative stories, learners can enhance their language skills, gain mastery of the structures of 
narrative texts, articulate their thoughts, nurture their self-identity, and foster meaningful social 
relationships (Jović 2020).
The overall structure of a narrative, according to Labov and Waletzky (1967), usually consists 
of five ‘stages’. These include an orientation that sets the scene and the context, a complication that 
disrupts the event, an evaluation of the protagonist’s feelings and judgement, followed by a reso­
lution that presents the solutions to problems and an optional coda that concludes the sequence 
of events and returns the reader/audience to the reality of the present. The complication–evalu­
ation–resolution sequence may be recurrent, creating a multiple-event narrative story. Drawing 
on previous literature, Flynn (2018) formulated and categorized 10 functional stages of a story in 
order to examine how young children’s construction of experience was related to the functions 
in oral storytelling. Flynn’s functional stages combine ‘the purposes that the stages serve’ and 
the ‘patterns of realization in the grammar of language’ (9), filling the form-function gap in oral 
storytelling.
The connection between lexical collocations and rhetorical 
moves
While rhetorical moves and formulaic language represent different levels of textual features, the 
association between the two constructs provides evidence for the integration of organizational 
and grammatical patterns used to build discourse (Mizumoto et al. 2017). Recent research on 
connecting rhetorical moves and different types of formulaic expressions has underscored the 
value of analyzing the synergy between organizational patterns and lexico-grammatical features 
in achieving a holistic understanding of discourse construction across diverse genres (e.g. Lu 
et al. 2021a). For example, Cortes (2013) identified lexical bundles from a corpus of RA introduc­
tions, categorized the bundles into four structural types and three functional types using Biber 
et al’.s (2004) taxonomies for structural and functional categorization, and connected bundles 
to rhetorical moves in RA introductions. Mizumoto et al. (2017) connected 250 lexical bundles 
and 25 rhetorical moves in applied linguistics RAs through a correspondence analysis. Omidian 
et al. (2018) investigated disciplinary variation in the use of multi-word expressions in rhetori­
cal moves of RA abstracts. Incorporating the classification frameworks proposed by Biber et al. 
(2004) and Hyland (2008), they categorized the multi-word expressions into three distinct groups 
based on their communicative functions in different moves: research-oriented, text-oriented, and 
­participant-oriented. They reported substantial variation in the use of multi-word expressions that 
fulfill different communicative purposes between RA writers in hard and soft disciplines, reflect­
ing differences in their priorities in reporting their research in RA abstracts. Recently, Lu et al. 
(2021b) matched phrase-frames with rhetorical moves of social science RA introductions and 
categorized the phrase-frames based on whether they occur only in one move-step, primarily 
in one move-step, or across multiple move-steps. In a similar analysis, Casal and Kessler (2020) 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
examined the form and rhetorical function of phrase-frames in a promotional genre (i.e. purpose 
statements in Fulbright grant applications). They identified 69 phrase-frames from 148 purpose 
statements, assigned them to one of four rhetorical move codes based on their use in context, 
and rated the pedagogical potential of those phrase-frames. Taken together, these studies have 
showcased strong associations between formulaic language and rhetorical moves as well as the 
different ways in which such associations may manifest in different genres and/or disciplines.
To date, the exploration of the connection between formulaic expressions and rhetorical moves 
in narrative stories remains an uncharted territory. Narratives, as a distinct genre, offer a rich and 
multifaceted structure that may interact with formulaic language in unique ways that are wor­
thy of investigation. Additionally, there is a lack of research on lexical collocations in the body of 
genre analysis studies of the relationship between formulaic expressions and rhetorical moves 
in general. Given the importance of collocations in L2 learning and the challenges they pose to 
L2 learners discussed above, an analysis of the connection of this type of formulaic expression to 
rhetorical moves will not only contribute to an important research gap in genre analysis research 
on form-function connections but also yield findings that can help L2 learners better understand 
the contextual uses and communicative functions of collocations in narrative stories.
The present study
In light of the research gaps discussed above, this study aims to extract lexical collocations from 
a corpus of expert-written narrative stories, annotate the corpus with a new rhetorical move 
framework for narrative stories, and match the identified collocations to rhetorical moves in the 
corpus. Three research questions guide this study:
1.	 What are the frequently used lexical collocations in narrative stories?
6.0
Tech
4 (0.59%)
210–1,680
670.50
596.04
16.75
Total
678 (100%)
117–6,171
1029.53
779.62
20.83
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
Contemporary American English (CoCA) (Davies 2020) to identify collocation of each node word. 
These were content word lemmas occurring within a five-word window on either side of the node 
word lemma at least 20 times per million words across at least 14 different texts, with a mini­
mum mutual information value of 3 (Rogers et al. 2021). Fourth, the collocations extracted were 
filtered to remove repetitions. Specifically, if two identical collocations were retrieved using dif­
ferent node words, we removed the one retrieved with the lower-frequency node word. At the end 
of this step, a total of 622 unique lexical collocations that met the predetermined frequency and 
range thresholds were identified from the corpus. Given that the initial list was obtained using 
statistical criteria only, the first and fourth authors critically reviewed the extracted collocations 
to ensure the quality of the list and its pedagogical value. Specifically, following Rogers et al.’ s 
(2021) criteria, the two researchers first independently judged whether each collocation was 
semantically meaningful and pedagogically relevant to the teaching and learning of English nar­
rative stories. They then resolved all discrepancies through discussion. As a result of this process, 
collocations that contained proper nouns (e.g. New/York), or that were semantically vague (e.g. 
think/do), overly general (e.g. people/by), or overly domain specific (e.g. digest/reader) were excluded. 
The 219 lexical collocations judged by both researchers to be semantically meaningful and ped­
agogical useful were retained on the final list.
Identifying rhetorical moves
To answer the second research question, we developed a rhetorical move framework for narrative 
stories and annotated the stories in the corpus using this framework, following a three-phrase 
procedure summarized in Figure 1. In the first phase, the researchers collaboratively outlined 
three basic stages of narrative stories and a unique set of rhetorical moves for each stage based 
on an analysis of five stories randomly sampled from the corpus using Labov and Waletzky’s 
(1967) framework of narratives, Martin and Rose’s (2008) ‘sections’ of narratives, Flynn’s (2018) 
functional stages for oral stories, as well as Jiang’s (2022) and Wang et al.’ s (2023) framework for 
classification of rhetorical moves and functions in narrative texts. A combination of top-down 
and bottom-up approaches was adopted in this phase, with ‘an inductive analysis that forefronts 
cognitive judgement and produces a balance between the textual data and the researcher’s 
knowledge of underlying rhetorical sections’ (Cotos et al. 2017: 94). Each text was segmented 
into three stages based on content and general rhetorical purposes, and each stage was then 
segmented into moves of different functional types. The smallest unit of a stage was a paragraph, 
and the smallest unit of a rhetorical move was a sentence, in accordance with Holmes’ (1997) 
definition of rhetorical moves.
Table 2 presents the three stages of narrative stories and their corresponding rhetorical moves 
included in our framework. The Orientation stage introduces the background of the story, expands 
the network of characters and causal relationships through minor events, and accounts for the 
situation. This stage includes three rhetorical moves, namely, Setting the scene, Laying out the event, 
and Giving the current situation. The Incident stage forms the main body of the narrative in terms 
of the plot by drawing forth the main conflict of the story and its gradual resolution. This stage 
Figure 1:  Move framework analytic procedure.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
792  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
also includes three rhetorical moves, namely, Complicating the story, Evaluating the status quo, and 
Dealing with the complication. Finally, the Conclusion stage reveals the main idea of the story and 
gives an account of the ending of the story. This stage includes two rhetorical moves, namely, 
Foregrounding the main idea and Ending the story.
In the second phase, we invited nine coders to test the rhetorical move framework, including 
one college and one high school English teacher, three undergraduate English major students, 
two Master’s students majoring in linguistics, and two doctoral students majoring in linguistics 
and educational technology, respectively. The first author presented the framework to the coders 
with definitions, examples, and indicative linguistic features for the moves. After familiarizing 
themselves with the framework, the coders each annotated the five stories selected in the first 
phase independently by highlighting text chunks with different colors corresponding to different 
rhetorical moves, as illustrated in Figure 2. The first author then met with all coders as a group 
to further clarify the definitions of the rhetorical moves, resolve discrepancies, discuss the dis­
tribution and linguistic features of the moves, and reflect on the applicability of the framework. 
The definitions of the rhetorical moves were fine-tuned as a result of this group discussion and 
reflection.
In the third phase, the first author and the nine coders annotated the remaining stories in the 
corpus using an online platform developed by a research assistant majoring in computer science 
(see Figure 3) and a corresponding coding protocol crafted by the researchers. In the platform, the 
coders focused on one paragraph (see the bolded paragraph in Figure 3) at a time. The sentences 
within the current paragraph were sequentially presented in the text box on the left one by one, 
and the annotator only needed to select the tag corresponding to the rhetorical move of the 
sentence and then click the ‘submit’ button to move on to the next sentence. Once the current 
paragraph was fully annotated, the next paragraph would automatically become available for 
annotation. The annotator could go back to any paragraph and revise the annotation of any sen­
tence during the annotation process. At the end of the annotation process, the annotator would 
review the annotated text as a whole and make necessary changes.
Following a training session on the online interface, each coder was asked to annotate 67–68 
texts. To assess inter-rater reliability, the 10 coders were divided into 5 pairs, and the 2 coders in 
Table 2:  Move framework for the annotation of narrative stories (based on Labov and Waletzky 
1967; Martin and Rose 2008; Flynn 2018; adapted from Jiang 2022; Wang et al. 2023)
Stage
Move
Function
Orientation
Setting the 
scene
Introducing characters, time, location, and behavioral situation
Laying out the 
event
Presenting a temporal sequence of occurrences at the beginning of 
the text and giving an account of how one event leads to another
Giving the 
current 
situation
Describing the temporary condition in the story before turning to 
the complication of the plot
Incident
Complicating 
the story
Unfolding temporally ordered actions that lead to one or more 
crises
Evaluating the 
status quo
Appraising complication by indicating attitudes, opinions, or the 
usuality of events, suspending or interwoven with action
Dealing with the 
complication
Performing further actions to resolve the crisis
Conclusion
Foregrounding 
the main idea
Stating the main idea of the story after the resolution, acting as a 
culminating event
Ending the story
Making a statement or comment about the story, or returning the 
narration to the present time
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
each pair annotated 10% (i.e. 7) of each other’s texts. The five pairs achieved an average of 92.35% 
of agreement on the annotated moves, comparable to the 91.7% of agreement on move annota­
tion reported by Lu et al. (2021b). The coders in each pair also checked each other’s remaining 
annotated texts and resolved all discrepancies through discussion and consultation with the first 
author when necessary.
Connecting lexical collocations and rhetorical moves
To answer the third question, we matched each lexical collocation occurrence to the rhetorical 
move of the sentence containing it in the corpus. Additionally, we conducted correspondence 
analysis using SPSS 26.0 (IBM Corp. 2019) to explore the most prevalent lexical collocations in 
each rhetorical move. Correspondence analysis generates a graphical display of the rows and 
columns (in our case lexical collocations and rhetorical moves) of a contingency table that 
Figure 2:  An excerpt of an annotated text.
Figure 3:  Online annotating platform.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
794  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
visualizes the salient relationships among row-column pairs (in our case collocation-move pairs) 
(Mizumoto et al. 2017). The outcome of this analysis was examined to shed light on the asso­
ciations between the collocations and rhetorical moves and the form-function connection in 
narrative stories in general.
Results
The lexical collocation list
Altogether, 219 lexical collocations were judged to be meaningful and pedagogically useful for 
the teaching and learning of English narrative stories. Table 3 presents the 10 most frequent 
lexical collocations along with example sentences extracted from the corpus. Supplementary 
Appendix A provides the complete lexical collocation list, with the frequency and range informa­
tion and an example sentence for each collocation.
We examined the frequency of the word lemmas in the collocations using Cobb's 
(2018) VocabProfiler, which integrates the 25K most frequent English word families in the British 
National Corpus (BNC) and CoCA as reference lists (Nation 2012). As shown in Table 4, 186 of 
the 208 word lemma types (89.4%) in the lexical collocations extracted are from the first 1K 
most frequent word families in the BNC/CoCA, and the remaining 22 (10.6%) are from the sec­
ond through fifth 1,000 most frequent word families. The high frequency of the word lemmas 
indicates that most of the collocations extracted should be relatively easily accessible to L2 
English learners. However, as Rogers et al. (2021) pointed out, familiarity with high-frequency 
words in general English might not be ‘sufficient for learners to comprehend or produce nat­
ural formulaic’ English in specific genres due to genre variation (p. 153). As such, despite the 
high frequency of the word lemmas making up the lexical collocations extracted, it remains 
important to examine the uses and functions of these lexical collocations in the genre of 
narrative stories.
Table 3:  Top 10 most frequent lexical collocations
Number
Node
Collocate
Example sentence
up
to
Helpless, he felt the water rising over his feet, 
then up to his knees, then his chest.
next
to
She would accept, sit next to him again, and that 
would be that, he thought.
time
at
Clara, 15 at the time, pressed the call button.
away
from
I stepped away from the wall.
home
in
Today, the couple are in their new home in 
Indianapolis.
get
out
‘Let’s get out of here’, he told his wife, dressing 
quickly.
first
time
It’s not the first time I’ve encountered them, nor 
will it be the last.
school
high
Jerry’s shyness prevented him from saying a single 
word to her until their junior year in high school.
so
much
There is so much we cannot control, but we must 
try to make things better when we are able.
side
on
A car is driving slowly down the street on the 
other side.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
While the collocations extracted are generally not structurally complete, their component word 
lemmas do exhibit strong grammatical correlations (Nation 2013). Inspired by Biber et al.’ s (2004) 
categorization of lexical bundles, we categorized the collocations into six structural types, as 
summarized in Table 5. Type 1 collocations consist of verb phrase fragments (e.g. tell/story, search/
for). Type 2 collocations incorporate noun phrase fragments (e.g. young/woman, store/grocery). Type 
3 collocations are composed of adjective phrase fragments (e.g. close/to, still/alive). Type 4 collo­
cations include dependent clause fragments (e.g. now/by, when/finally). Type 5 and Type 6 colloca­
tions include fragments of adverb phrases (e.g. again/never, little/more) and prepositional phrase 
fragments (e.g. through/window, down/road), respectively.
Rhetorical move framework of narrative stories
To address the second research question, we first developed a rhetorical move framework for 
narrative stories. This framework consisted of three stages, namely, Orientation, Incident, and 
Conclusion, which were further categorized into eight moves. We illustrate the rhetorical stages 
and moves in the framework with examples from different narrative stories from the corpus in 
this subsection and report on the distribution of these stages and moves in the corpus in the next 
subsection.
Table 4:  Frequency distribution of the word lemmas in the lexical collocations extracted
Frequency level
Families (%)
Types (%)
Tokens (%)
Cumulative tokens (%)
K-1
186 (89.4)
186 (89.4)
415 (94.7)
94.7
K-2
14 (6.7)
14 (6.7)
15 (3.4)
98.1
K-3
4 (1.9)
4 (1.9)
4 (0.9)
99.0
K-4
3 (1.4)
3 (1.4)
3 (0.7)
99.7
K-5
1 (0.5)
1 (0.5)
1 (0.2)
100.0
Total
208 (100.0)
208 (100.0)
438 (100.0)
Note. K-1, K-2, K-3, K-4, and K-5 denote the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth 1,000 most frequent word families, 
respectively.
Table 5:  Structural types of lexical collocations
1. Verb phrase fragments (82 items)
  For example, tell/story, search/for, check/out
2. Noun phrase fragments (41 items)
  For example, young/woman, seat/belt, store/grocery
3. Adjective phrase fragments (7 items)
  For example, close/to, still/alive
4. Dependent clause fragments (8 items)
  For example, now/by, when/finally
5. Adverb phrase fragments (18 items)
  For example, again/once, again/never, little/more
6. Prepositional phrase fragments (63 items)
  For example, through/window, down/road, day/end
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
796  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
The first stage, Orientation, establishes the context and ‘presents an expectant activity 
sequence’ for the story (Martin and Rose 2008: 51). This stage consists of three moves. Move 1, 
Setting the scene, introduces the characters, time, location, and behavioral situation of the story. 
In Example (1), this move describes a character’s routine behavioral situation before unfolding 
an unusual experience.
(1)  Almost every night for more than ten years, Kirk Alexander, 48, of Salem, Oregon ordered a late dinner 
from his local Domino’s pizza store. He had no signature order—sometimes he would call for a salad, some­
times a pie, sometimes chicken wings.
(Reader’s Digest 2022c)
Move 2, Laying out the event, presents a temporal sequence of occurrences at the beginning of the 
text and gives an account of how one event leads to another. This move aims to expound on the 
context and acquaint the readers with the setting of the story by promoting a plot development. 
In Example (2), this move outlines an early exchange at the beginning of the story between a 
nurse and a patient, building up a friendly atmosphere while doing so.
(2)  Eventually I hit on a reliable way to make Patty smile: mentioning her nine-year-old son, Stephen. She’d 
tell me how well he did in school, how he’d been selected to read a poem he wrote at a local bookstore.
(Reader’s Digest 2022d)
Move 3, Giving the current situation, describes the temporary condition in the story before turning 
to the complication of the plot. This move helps readers conceive the overall environment and 
atmosphere, paving the way for the next stage. In Example (3), this move describes the environ­
ment the protagonist was in when he was hiking with his mother.
(3)  He watched 15 or so other hikers enjoy the vista; one hiker, around 60 and dressed in pink, was peeking 
over the lip of the precipice with her husband.
(Reader’s Digest 2022e)
The second stage, Incident, presents the main event of the story and signifies the major develop­
ment of the plot. This stage consists of three moves. Move 4, Complicating the story, unfolds tem­
porally ordered actions that break the normalcy established in the first stage and that lead to one 
or more conflicts of the story. In Example (4), this move describes a crisis from a pizza delivery 
driver’s point of view, where a man who regularly ordered pizza did not come to the store and 
could not be found at home, disrupting the expected course of events.
(4)  He could plainly see that Alexander’s TV set was on, as were his lights; but after several minutes, 
Alexander still didn’t answer the door.
(Reader’s Digest 2022c)
Move 5, Evaluating the status quo, appraises the complication by indicating attitudes or opinions 
towards it. Evaluation is often ‘deployed to suspend the action, increasing the narrative tension, 
and so intensifying the release when tension is resolved’ (Martin and Rose 2008: 52). In Example 
(5), this move conveys the narrator’s appraisal of and emotional reaction to the boy’s situation, 
setting up the expectation for a resolution.
(5)  All of this, we knew, was tough medicine for such a little boy. We were total strangers to him, and he to 
us... ‘Wow’, I thought. ‘This kid really is unusual’.
(Reader’s Digest 2022d)
Move 6, Dealing with the complication, responds to and resolves the crisis presented in Move 4. In 
Example (6), which immediately follows Example (5), this move describes the narrator’s actions 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
in response to the boy’s situation and a series of subsequent actions of the boy following the 
resolution of the crisis.
(6)  Finally, we took him home with us... All we could do was love him and pull him into the thick of our busy 
family life. He joined a basketball team.
(Reader’s Digest 2022d)
Stage three, Conclusion, consolidates the gist of the narrative and brings it to an end, returning the 
readers to the ‘reality’ of the present. This stage consists of two moves. Move 7, Foregrounding the 
main idea, states the main idea of the text after the resolution and reinterprets the central theme 
of the story either implicitly through a culminating event or explicitly through an advocation 
of the moral value of the story. In Example (7), this move unveils the central theme of the story 
through a final sequence of events.
(7)  On Christmas Eve, I learned that Stephen had never met Santa Claus, so I called the local mall to find an 
on-duty Santa Claus, shared a bit of our story, then rushed with my daughters to take Stephen to see him. 
Watching Santa hug Stephen close and have a beautiful heart-to-heart with him about his mother was one 
of the most moving moments of my life.
(Reader’s Digest 2022d)
Move 8, Ending the story, makes a statement or comment about the story or returns the narration 
to the present time. It may conclude the story by presenting the current situation after the main 
event, or reorient the story by presenting a new context that is not directly related to the main 
event. In Example (8), this move concludes the story by narrating a recent event, creating a new 
context that leaves the readers with much room for imagination.
(8)  Recently, the students in Stephen’s class had to write a poem that started with ‘Home is …’ He was so 
sad because most of the other kids wrote poems that started with ‘Home is my mom doing …’ But he ended 
up writing this:
Home is Karen listening to her inspirational meditation videos.
Home is Mike’s delicious mac ‘n’ cheese.
Home is feeling cared for, loved, and protected.
(Reader’s Digest 2022d)
Distribution of stages and moves
A total of 47,073 rhetorical chunks were annotated as one of the eight moves in the corpus. 
As shown in Table 6, moves of Stage 2, Incident, were the most predominant, occupying 71% 
of all moves. Within Stage 2, Move 4 was the most frequent, accounting for 29.14% of all 
moves (see also Figure 4), indicating the critical importance to detail the complication in the 
body of the story. Moves 6 and 5 were the second and third most frequent, accounting for 
23.64% and 18.21% of all moves, respectively. The high proportion of these Stage 2 moves is 
in line with Martin and Rose’s (2008) findings that the complication and resolution are the 
most essential moves in narrative stories. Moves of Stage 1, Orientation, occupied 17.83% of 
all moves. The most frequent move in this stage was Move 2, which accounted for 8.36% of 
all moves and 46.87% of all Stage 1 moves, indicating the importance of laying out the event 
at the beginning of the story. Finally, moves of Stage 3, Conclusion, accounted for the smallest 
proportion of all moves (i.e. 11.17%). Within this stage, Move 7 was more frequent than Move 
8, indicating that storytellers often choose to highlight the main idea or theme of the story 
as they conclude the story. Move 8 was the least frequent among all moves, accounting for 
4.16% of all moves only, consistent with Martin and Rose’s (2008) finding that the ending of a 
story tends to be brief or optional.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
798  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
Connection between lexical collocations and rhetorical moves in 
narrative stories
The results of the correspondence analysis of collocation-move association are summarized in 
Figure 5 using a two-dimensional scatterplot. The full collocation–move matrix and the dimen­
sional score of each collocation are provided in Supplementary Appendices B and C, respectively. 
The scatterplot allows us to visually examine the connection between lexical collocations and 
moves. Specifically, collocations that are more frequently used to realize a particular move can 
Table 6:  Distribution of moves in the corpus
Move
Number
Percent
Stage 1, Orientation
8,391
17.83
  Move 1: Setting the Scene
2,321
4.93
  Move 2: Laying Out the Event
3,933
8.36
  Move 3: Giving the Current Situation
2,137
4.54
Stage 2, Incident
33,421
71.00
  Move 4: Complicating the Story
13,718
29.14
  Move 5: Evaluating the Status Quo
8,573
18.21
  Move 6: Dealing with the Complication
11,130
23.64
Stage 3, Conclusion
5,261
11.17
  Move 7: Foregrounding the Main Idea
3,302
7.01
  Move 8: Ending the Story
1,959
4.16
Total
47,073
100.0
Figure 4:  Percentages of different moves in the corpus.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
be found closer to that move than to others. Many of the frequent lexical collocations are closely 
clustered around the origin, where Moves 2, 4, 5, 6, and 8 are located, indicating that a large vari­
ety of the collocations are involved in laying out the event, developing the plot, and ending the 
story in the narratives. However, Moves 1 and 7 and to a lesser extent Move 3 are farther away 
from the origin and are each associated with a smaller range of collocations. For instance, Move 
1, which is placed on the top of the figure, is close to such collocations as away/home, long/before, 
school/high, and police/department, indicating that these collocations are strongly associated with 
scene setting in the narrative stories in the corpus.
Following the correspondence analysis aimed at establishing the connection between collo­
cations and rhetorical moves, we conducted a qualitative analysis of the functions of the collo­
cations, guided by the premise that this connection is inherently contingent upon the functions 
these collocations serve within the narrative discourse (Cortes 2013). This analysis involved a 
systematic examination of the collocations in their specific contexts of use to determine the 
broader communicative purposes they help fulfill in the narratives. This detailed analysis yielded 
three overarching functions that encapsulate the varied roles these collocations play in advanc­
ing narrative stories.
The first function that lexical collocation was frequently used to realize was the introduction 
of situational information, such as time (e.g. day/before, few/ago), location (e.g. through/window, 
across/country), and behavioral situation (e.g. up/grow, first/time), as illustrated in Examples (9) to 
Figure 5:  Scatterplot of collocation-move correspondence.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
800  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
(11). This function was found to be particularly pronounced in the three Stage 1 moves, where 
background information is of paramount importance.
(9)  By now it is past noon and even hotter than the day before. (Time introduction)
(10)He then peered through the front window. (Location introduction)
(11)The kittens are all grown up now. (Behavioral situation introduction)
The second function pertains to the substantial role that collocations play in advancing the sto­
ryline, predominantly evident in Stage 2 moves. This is not surprising, given that plot develop­
ment is the most important part of a narrative story (Martin and Rose 2008). The three specific 
functions collocations were used to realize include the elaboration of events (e.g. soon/after, neck/
around), the description of circumstances (e.g. like/feel, want/do), and resolution actions (e.g. hold/
on, get/help). Event elaboration collocations often involve nouns or adverbs to highlight aspects of 
the plot development, as illustrated in Example (12), circumstance description collocations often 
involve mental state verbs, as illustrated in Example (13), and collocations describing resolution 
actions tend to involve the use of action verbs, as illustrated in Example (14). The use of diverse 
lexical collocations in these ways allowed the narrators to effectively convey event sequences 
and character actions as the narratives unfolded.
(12)  In the process, the backpack strap wrapped around his neck, strangling him. (Event elaboration)
(13)And sometimes they feel a bit like a miracle. (Circumstance description)
(14)Hello, I’m trying to get some help to you. (Resolution action)
The third function centers on the expression of attitudes from the characters’ perspectives (e.g. 
make/sure, think/about) and the statement of the main idea of the story from the narrator’s 
stance (e.g. end/up, so/much), as illustrated in Examples (15) and (16). While the event evalua­
tion and circumstance description functions shared some of the similar collocations, the former 
emphasized the subjective feelings of the characters about the event, while the latter empha­
sized the surrounding environment itself.
(15)  All of this has made me think about what a wonderful life I have lived. (Event evaluation)
(16)And sometimes you end up being the answer to their prayers. (Main idea statement)
Discussion
The analysis for our first research question centered on identifying a list of lexical collocations 
that can be useful for the teaching and learning of English narrative stories. Following the recent 
practice in corpus-based formulaic language research (e.g. Cortes 2013; Omidian et al. 2018), we 
extracted a candidate list of 622 collocations from a corpus of narrative stories using multiple 
statistical criteria. Informed by Rogers et al.’ s (2021) observation that relying on corpus data alone 
is ‘insufficient in creating usable teaching and learning materials’ (154), we manually filtered 
the list to ensure that all collocations included in our final list were meaningful and pedagogi­
cally useful, consistent with other studies that aimed at creating pedagogically useful resources 
from text corpora (e.g. Durrant 2009; Lu et al. 2018; Rogers et al. 2021). The majority of the com­
ponent words of the collocations were within the first 1,000 most frequent words in the BNC/
CoCA, indicating that most of the collocations extracted from the narrative stories are in the 
general domain and should be accessible or teachable to beginning or intermediate L2 English 
learners. Given the importance of context in understanding and learning collocations, we have 
provided example sentences from the corpus for the collocations extracted (see Supplementary 
Appendix A). Informed by Biber et al’.s (2004) structural taxonomy for lexical bundles, we cat­
egorized the lexical collocations on our list into four types of structural fragments, including 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
verb phrase fragments, noun phrase fragments, adjective phrase fragments, and adverb phrase 
fragments. It became clear later that collocations of different structural types tended to be more 
frequently used for different functions.
The analysis for our second research question involved devising a rhetorical move frame­
work for narrative stories, annotating the corpus of narrative stories using the framework, and 
examining the distribution of different rhetorical stages and moves in the corpus. This analysis 
helps us understand the rhetorical structure or strategical organization (Cotos et al. 2017) of 
narrative stories produced by expert writers. Martin and Rose (2008) proposed three stages for 
narrative stories, that is, Orientation, Complication, and Resolution. Building on their proposal and 
based on our analysis of the corpus of narrative stories, we proposed the following three stages 
of narrative stories: Orientation, Incident, and Conclusion, and, more importantly, fleshed out a set 
of moves with distinct rhetorical functions for each stage. An analysis of the distribution of the 
stages and moves in the corpus showed a primary rhetorical emphasis on Stage 2, with Move 
4 (Complicating the story) ranked as the most frequent among all moves, in line with Martin and 
Rose’s (2008) findings that complication and resolution make up the most essential part of a nar­
rative story. In Stages 1 and 3, Move 2 (Laying out the event) and Move 7 (Foregrounding the main idea) 
were the most frequent, respectively, shedding light on what narrators pay the most attention to 
in the Orientation and Conclusion stages of the story. The focus on foregrounding the main idea in 
the Conclusion stage resonates with Deane et al. ’s (2019) finding pertaining to the emphasis on the 
morals and themes of the story in the Narrative Reflection phase of storytelling.
The analysis for our third research question included a correspondence analysis of lexical col­
locations and rhetorical moves in narrative stories, followed by an analysis of the specific com­
municative functions of the lexical collocations used in different rhetorical moves in context. 
No collocation occurred exclusively in any one move, different from findings that some larger 
phraseological units such as lexical bundles and phrase-frames are exclusively move-specific in 
academic writing (e.g. Cortes 2013; Lu et al. 2021b). However, the correspondence analysis showed 
that Moves 1, 3, and 7 have the strongest association with a relatively small range of lexical col­
locations, while the other five moves, including all three Stage 2 moves, have been realized using 
a large variety of lexical collocations. This difference may have arisen from the differences in the 
degree of specificity and/or uniqueness of the rhetorical functions of the moves. For example, 
Move 1 entails substantially greater use of collocations that introduce the time, location, and 
behavioral situation of the story to set the scene than other moves, while the three Stage 2 moves 
involve a broader range of collocations to cover different aspects of the plot to develop the story. 
A further analysis of the collocations in context revealed three types of communicative functions 
of the collocations aligned with the rhetorical functions of the three stages of narrative sto­
ries, namely, to introduce situational information, advance the storyline, and express attitudes. 
Collocations with these different functions also tended to be of different structural types. The 
patterns of collocation-move associations unveiled by the correspondence analysis lend support 
for the theoretical framework of genre competence that highlights the nexus between language 
features and rhetorical strategies in specific genes in general (e.g. Swales 1990; Tardy 2016; Lu 
et al. 2021a) and the notion that such linguistic choices in narratives serve as vehicles for specific 
discourse functions in particular (Trosborg 1997).
Our findings hold good promise for enhancing genre-based pedagogy. The move framework 
proposed for narrative stories can be adopted and adapted by teachers to facilitate L2 learners’ 
understanding of the general rhetorical structure of the narrative story genre and the specific 
ways in which expert storywriters piece together a well-structured narrative story (Jiang 2022). 
Teachers can also draw on our findings regarding the distribution of rhetorical stages and 
moves to help L2 learners note the relative frequency of chunks with different rhetorical func­
tions and appreciate how expert storywriters allocate spaces for different rhetorical moves. 
The list of lexical collocations extracted from the corpus and the example sentences that 
accompany the list could be used as resources to help the learners expand their repertoire of 
commonly used collocations in the narrative story genre. The structural categorizations of the 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
802  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
collocations on the list could make it easier for teachers and learners to focus on collocations 
of specific structural types if desired. More importantly, our findings regarding the connection 
between lexical collocations and rhetorical moves and the primary functions that lexical col­
locations are frequently used to realize can help learners gain a more nuanced understanding 
of how expert storytellers employ different linguistic devices to materialize different commu­
nicative functions.
To facilitate the pedagogical application of our findings, we have set up a searchable online 
interface1 that allows teachers and learners to search the corpus for collocations by the node 
word, retrieve a list of collocations along with their frequency in the corpus, the rhetorical stages 
and moves they occur in, and example sentences from the corpus they occur in (Wang et al. 
2023). The online interface can serve as an especially useful tool for learners to explore lexical 
collocations in relation to rhetorical moves in narrative stories. This exploration could comple­
ment teacher-designed genre analysis activities to promote L2 English learners’ competence in 
deploying appropriate collocations for different rhetorical moves in narrative story writing (e.g. 
Dong and Lu 2020), in line with the growing recognition that corpus-informed language instruc­
tion can help EFL learners internalize language patterns in meaningful communicative contexts 
(Rodríguez-Fuentes and Swatek 2022).
Conclusion
Extending the emerging line of genre analysis research on bridging the form-function gap into 
the understudied genre of narrative stories, this study has identified a list of frequent lexical col­
locations from a corpus of narrative stories, developed a rhetorical move framework for narrative 
stories, examined the distribution of rhetorical stages and moves in the corpus, and explored the 
connection between lexical collections and rhetorical moves in narrative stories. Our findings 
have useful implications for the theoretical framework of genre competence and genre-based 
pedagogy. Importantly, the findings of the study culminated in a pedagogically useful online 
interface for searching the corpus for collocations by the node word and exploring their use in 
sentences realizing different rhetorical stages and moves in context.
Several important avenues for future research exist. First, the specific pedagogical value of 
our research findings and the online search interface for genre-based narrative writing pedagogy 
can be explored in classroom teaching contexts. Second, a parallel analysis of the frequently 
used collocations, the distribution of rhetorical stages and moves, and the connection between 
collocations and rhetorical moves in a corpus of narrative stories produced by L2 English learners 
would shed light on the gaps in their collocational and rhetorical knowledge of this genre. Finally, 
the scope of analysis of the form-function connection in this genre can be expanded to other 
types of phraseological units and other linguistic constructions in general.
Supplementary data
Supplementary material is available at Applied Linguistics online.
Notes on contributors
Yishi Jiang is a PhD student at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. His research interests include lan­
guage assessment, corpus linguistics and computer-assisted language learning.
Xiaofei Lu is professor of Applied Linguistics and Asian Studies at The Pennsylvania State 
University. His research interests are in corpus linguistics, English for Academic Purposes, sec­
ond language acquisition, and second language writing. He is the author of Corpus Linguistics and 
Second Language Acquisition: Perspective, Issues, and Findings (2023, Routledge).
Fengkai Liu is a PhD student in the Department of Linguistics and Translation at City University 
of Hong Kong. His research interest primarily focuses on computational linguistics.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
Jianxin Zhang is an MA student at University of International Business and Economics. Her 
research interests include corpus linguistics and language testing.
Tan Jin (corresponding author) is a professor in the School of Foreign Studies at South China 
Normal University. His research interests include corpus linguistics, language assessment and 
­computer-assisted language learning. His research has appeared in Language Learning & Technology, 
Language Testing, Modern Language Journal and TESOL Quarterly Address for correspondence: School of 
Foreign Studies, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China . <tjin@scnu.edu.cn>
Note
1 The URL of the online searchable interface is https://www.languagedata.net/writer/search/.
References
Ackermann, K. and Y. Chen. 2013. ‘Developing the academic collocation list (ACL): A corpus-driven 
and expert-judged approach,’ Journal of English for Academic Purposes 12/4: 235–47. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.08.002
Anthony, L. 2022. AntConc. Computer Software. Waseda University.
Berman, R. A. and B. Nir-Sagiv. 2007. ‘Comparing narrative and expository text construction across 
adolescence: A developmental paradox,’ Discourse Processes 43: 79–120. https://doi.org/10.1207/
s15326950dp4302_1
Biber, D., S. Conrad, and V. Cortes. 2004. ‘If you look at…: Lexical bundles in university teaching and 
textbooks,’ Applied Linguistics 25: 371–405. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/25.3.371
Bychkovska, T. and J. J. Lee. 2017. ‘At the same time: Lexical bundles in L1 and L2 university student 
argumentative writing,’ Journal of English for Academic Purposes 30: 38–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeap.2017.10.008
Casal, J. E. and M. Kessler. 2020. ‘Form and rhetorical function of phrase-frames in promotional 
writing: A corpus-and genre-based analysis,’ System 95: 102370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
system.2020.102370
CNBC. 2019. ‘How Reader’s Digest went from life support to modern, digital-first multimedia brand’, 
available 
at 
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/02/how-readers-digest-transformed-into-a-digi­
tal-multimedia-brand.html. Accessed 27 August 2023.
Cobb, T. 2018. VocabProfiler VP Compleat BNC-COCA-25. Computer Software. Available at https://www.
lextutor.ca/vp/comp/. Accessed 1 September 2022.
Conrad, S. and D. Biber. 2004. ‘The frequency and use of lexical bundles in conversation and academic 
prose,’ Lexicographica: International Annual for Lexicography 20: 56–71.
Cortes, V. 2013. ‘The purpose of this study is to: Connecting lexical bundles and moves in research 
article introductions,’ Journal of English for Academic Purposes 12/1: 33–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeap.2012.11.002
Cotos, E., S. Huffman, and S. Link. 2017. ‘A move/step model for methods sections: Demonstrating 
rigour and credibility,’ English for Specific Purposes 46: 90–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
esp.2017.01.001
Davies, M. 2020. The Corpus of Contemporary American English (CoCA). Data Set. Available at https://
www.english-corpora.org/coca/. Accessed 1 September 2022.
Deane, P., et al. 2019. ‘The key practice, building and sharing stories and social understandings: The 
intrinsic value of narrative,’ Educational Testing Service 2019/1: 1–78. https://doi.org/10.1002/
ets2.12266
Dong, J. and X. Lu. 2020. ‘Promoting discipline-specific genre competence with corpus-based 
genre analysis activities,’ English for Specific Purposes 58: 138–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
esp.2020.01.005
Durrant, P. 2009. ‘Investigating the viability of a collocation list for students of English for academic 
purposes,’ English for Specific Purposes 28/3: 157–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2009.02.002
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
804  |  Y. Jiang, X. Lu, F. Liu, J. Zhang, and T. Jin
Ellis, N. C. 2012. ‘Memory for language’ in P. Robinson (ed.): Cognition and Second Language Instruction. 
Cambridge University Press, pp. 32–68.
Flynn, E. E. 2018. ‘Storying experience: Young children’s early use of story genres,’ Text & Talk 38/4: 
457–80. https://doi.org/10.1515/text-2018-0010
Holmes, R. 1997. ‘Genre analysis, and the social sciences: An investigation of the structure of research 
article discussion sections in three disciplines,’ English for Specific Purposes 16/4: 321–37. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(96)00038-5
Hyland, K. 2008. ‘Genre and academic writing in the disciplines,’ Language Teaching 41/4: 543–62.
IBM Corp. 2019. IBM SPSS Statistics for macOS. Computer Software. IBM Corp.
Jiang, Y. 2022. ‘The connection between collocations and rhetorical moves in narrative stories: A corpus-based 
study’, unpublished Master’s thesis, Sun Yat-sen University.
Jović, S. 2020. ‘The narrative games we play: Varied use of narrative strategies across genres and 
socioeconomic positions,’ Language & Communication 74: 87–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
langcom.2020.06.001
Kang, J. Y. 2005. ‘Written narratives as an index of L2 competence in Korean EFL learners,’ Journal of 
Second Language Writing 14/4: 259–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2005.10.002
Kanoksilapatham, B. 2007. ‘Rhetorical moves in biochemistry research articles’ in D. Biber, U. Connor, 
and T. A. Upton (eds): Discourse on the Move: Using Corpus Analysis to Describe Discourse Structure. 
John Benjamins Publishing Company, pp. 73–119.
Labov, W. and J. Waletzky. 1967. ‘Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal experience’ in J. Helm 
(ed.): Essays on the Verbal and Visual Arts: Proceedings of the 1966 Annual Spring Meeting of the American 
Ethnological Society. University of Washington Press, pp. 12–44.
Lawler, S. 2002. ‘Narrative in social research’ in T. May (ed.): Qualitative Research in Action. SAGE 
Publications, pp. 242–58.
Lu, X., J. E. Casal, and Y. Liu. 2021a. ‘Towards the synergy of genre- and corpus-based approaches 
to academic writing research and pedagogy,’ International Journal of Computer Assisted Language 
Learning and Teaching 11/1: 59–71.
Lu, X., J. Yoon, and O. Kisselev. 2021b. ‘Matching phrase-frames to rhetorical moves in social science 
research article introductions,’ English for Specific Purposes 61: 63–83. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
esp.2020.10.001
Lu, X., J. Yoon, and O. Kisselev. 2018. ‘A phrase-frame list for social science research article introduc­
tions,’ Journal of English for Academic Purposes 36: 76–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.09.004
Manning, C. D., et al. 2014. ‘The Stanford CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit’. Proceedings 
of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System 
Demonstrations, 55–60.
Martin, J. R. and D. Rose. 2008. Genre Relations: Mapping Culture. Equinox.
Mizumoto, A., S. Hamatani, and Y. Imao. 2017. ‘Applying the bundle–move connection approach to 
the development of an online writing support tool for research articles,’ Language Learning 67/4: 
885–921. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12250
Nation, P. 2013. Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge University Press.
Negretti, R. and L. McGrath. 2018. ‘Scaffolding genre knowledge and metacognition: Insights from 
an L2 doctoral research writing course,’ Journal of Second Language Writing 40: 12–31. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jslw.2017.12.002
Omidian, T., H. Shahriari, and A. Siyanova-Chanturia. 2018. ‘A cross-disciplinary investigation of 
­multi-word expressions in the moves of research article abstracts,’ Journal of English for Academic 
Purposes 36: 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.08.002
Reader’s Digest. 2022a. ‘About Reader’s Digest’, available at https://www.rd.com/about-readers-di­
gest/. Accessed 19 January 2022.
Reader’s Digest. 2022b. ‘Real life stories’, available at https://www.rd.com/real-life-stories/. Accessed 
19 January 2022.
Reader’s Digest. 2022c. ‘That time ordering Domino’s pizza saved a man’s life’, available at https://
www.rd.com/article/pizza-saved-mans-life/. Accessed 31 January 2022.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June
What Should Go with this Word Here  |
Reader’s Digest. 2022d. ‘A nurse’s story: taking in my cancer patient’s 9-year-old son was the best 
thing I ever did’, available at https://www.rd.com/article/nurse-cancer-patient-son/. Accessed 2 
February 2022.
Reader’s Digest. 2022e. ‘How an 18-year-old helped save a hiker who fell 75 feet off a mountain cliff’, 
available at https://www.rd.com/article/teenager-saves-hiker/. Accessed 3 February 2022.
Reppen, R., N. Ide, and K. Suderman. 2005. American National Corpus (ANC) Second Release. Data Set. 
Available at https://anc.org/. Accessed 1 September 2022.
Rodríguez-Fuentes, R. A. and A. M. Swatek. 2022. ‘Exploring the effect of corpus-informed and con­
ventional homework materials on fostering EFL students’ grammatical construction learning,’ 
System 104: 102676. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102676
Rogers, J., et al.. 2021. ‘The creation and application of a large-scale corpus-based academic ­multi-word 
unit list,’ English for Specific Purposes 62: 142–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2021.01.001
Sanford, A. J. and C. Emmott. 2012. Mind, Brain and Narrative. Cambridge University Press.
Shin, D. and P. Nation. 2008. ‘Beyond single words: The most frequent collocations in spoken English,’ 
ELT Journal 62/4: 339–48. https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccm091
Swales, J. 1981. Aspects of Article Introductions. Language Studies Unit.
Swales, J. 1990. Genre Analysis: English in Academic and Research Settings. Cambridge University Press.
Tardy, C. M. 2016. Beyond Convention: Genre Innovation in Academic Writing. University of Michigan Press. 
https://doi.org/10.3998/mpub.5173647
Trosborg, A. 1997. ‘Text typology: Register, genre and text type’ in A. Trosborg (ed.): Text Typology and 
Translation. Benjamins Translation Library, pp. 3–24.
Underwood, G., N. Schmitt, and A. Galpin. 2004. ‘The eyes have it: An eye-movement study into the 
processing of formulaic sequences’ in N. Schmitt (ed.): Formulaic Sequences. John Benjamins, pp. 
153–72.
Wang, Y., et al. 2023. ‘Connecting form with function: Model texts for bilingual learners’ narrative 
writing,’ Assessing Writing 57: 100753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100753
Webb, S. and E. Kagimoto. 2011. ‘Learning collocations: Do the number of collocates, position of 
the node word, and synonymy affect learning?,’ Applied Linguistics 32/3: 259–76. https://doi.
org/10.1093/applin/amq051
Wray, A. and M. Perkins. 2000. ‘The functions of formulaic language: An integrated model,’ Language 
& Communication 20/1: 1–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0271-5309(99)00015-4
Yoon, H. J. 2021. ‘Challenging the connection between task perceptions and language use in L2 writ­
ing: Genre, cognitive task complexity, and linguistic complexity,’ Journal of Second Language Writing 
54: 100857. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2021.100857
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/applij/article/45/5/786/7589736 by college of foreign languages,hunan normal university user on 22 June